---
title: Economics in One Lesson 
slug: economics-in-one
date: 2020-06-25
status: published
---

## Notes on Economics in One Lesson by Henry Hazlitt


### The Lesson

Fallacies of economics, the self-interest of man ad the tendency to see only
the immediate effects of a given policy (overlooking secondary consequences).

The whole of economics can be reduced to a single lesson, and that lesson can
be reduced to a single sentence. 

> _The art of economics consists in looking not merely at the immediate but at
> the longer effects of any act or policy; it consists in tracing the
> consequences of that policy not merely for one group but for all groups._

Of course, the opposite error is possible. We ought to not concentrate _only_
on the long-run results.

### The Broken Window

A boy smashes a bakers window. Community members claim there's positive sum in
this scenario, The payment of the glazer (to fix the window) will allow him to
spend with other merchants, the smashed window will go on providing money and
employment &mdash; The boy was a public benefactor. The public fails to see the
$ 50 the baker loses in repairs. The $ 50 would have gone towards a suit.

WYSIWYG (What you see is what you get).

**Confusing need with demand.**

The more war destroys, the more it impoverishes, the greater is the post-war
need. But need is not demand.  

Effective economic demand requires not merely need but corresponding
purchasing power. The needs of China today are greater than the USA, its
purchasing power and *new business* that it can stimulate, are smaller.

There's an increase in production for *particular products* i.e. diversion of
demand Post war demand in most countries will shrink in absolute amount as
compared to pre-war demand as a result of post-war supply shrinking.  
Technological discoveries and advances during the war, may increase individual
or national productivity.

The destruction of war will, it is true, divert post-war demand from some
channels into others.

A certain number of people may continue to be deceived indefinitely regarding
their real economic welfare by rising wages and prices caused by an excess of
printed money.  The belief that a genuine prosperity can be brought about by a
"replacement demand" is a fallacy.

### Public Work Means Taxes

With such public works (infrastructure), necessary for their own sake, and
defended on that ground alone, I am not here concerned. I am here concerned
with public works considered as a means of "providing employment" or of adding
wealth to the community that it would not otherwise have had.

The bridge built will provide X jobs per year,  however, for a bridge costing
$Y, the taxpayers will lose $Y, which could have been spent on things they
needed.

At best, a _diversion_ of jobs happened as a result of the project, more
bridges, fewer auto mobile workers, farmers. (I don't agree here) Essentially,
one thing has been created instead of another.

The psychological benefit of government works are that men are seen to work on
the houses, people live in them and proudly show their friends through the
rooms.

The author continues to argue against government projects for the sake of
_creating jobs_, (An argument for UBI?)

Increased in tax on corporations (hurting the ability to offset losses against
gains) leads to slower expansion and enterprise.

With personal income, risk-taking shrinks (investing in markets?)

The larger the percentage of the national income taken by taxes the greater the
deterrent to private production and employment. 

### Credit Diverts Production

Assuming non-inflationary government credit

Farmer A and B. Farmer A can acquire a loan from private bank, less risk for
the bank as farmer A is reputable. Government hands loan to B as _he is denied
from the bank (due to likelihood of unable to pay back loan_. In addition to
losses from incomplete payments, increased interest rates hurt A or farm prices
as the supply decreases (due to government credit)

Governments are encouraged to take on risks _too great for private industry_
with taxpayers' money. Where private loans risk their own or face losing
business (hmm...)

Another illustration of the fallacy of seeing a special short term interest,
forgetting the general interest in the long run.

Government loans or subsidies to business; taxing successful private business
in order to support unsuccessful ones. 

### Curse of Machinery

Smith's _The Wealth of Nations_, Chapter 1, without machinery, a workman could
hardly make one pin a day, &hellip; with machinery he can make 4,8000 pins
a day. The fallacy is thinking the jobs lost due to machinery and
overproduction  &hellip; may become chronic (_Recent economic changes_ - David
A. Wells).

Elasticity

: A fall in the price of overcoats causes a larger total amount of money to be
spent on overcoats than previously, then more people may be employed even in
making overcoats than before the new labour-saving machine was introduced.

In the case of no surplus of overcoats, just a reduced price for them, the
extra $ z leftover can be spent on something else.

The result of the machine is to increase _production_, to raise the standard of
living and increase economic welfare.

Technology helps increase _voluntary_ unemployment, people can afford to work
less hours. Children and over-aged aren't required to work.

Machines increase money wages or, by reducing prices, increase the goods and
services that the same money can buy. Sometimes both.

### Spread-The-Work Schemes

Fallacy

: there is a fixed amount of work to be done in the world, if we cannot add to
this work by thinking up more cumbersome ways, we can think of ways to
distribute it.

The case of cutting maximum hours, allowing additional people to be employed,
reduces the wages of the original employee. Furthermore, the purchase of more
leisure was probably not a _voluntary_ decision.

In increasing hourly rate to compensate for a shorter working week, an increase
in production costs may happen. A policy of monetary inflation, to enable
prices to rise so the increased hourly wages can be paid disguises _real_ wage
rates.

The greatest downfall is the above fallacy. 
> "There is no limit to the amount of work to be done as long as any human need
or wish that work could fill remain unsatisfied"

### Disbanding Troops and Bureaucrats

Argument for encouraging troops to become self-supporting civilians i.e.
integrated into normal civilian workforce.

They (soldiers, policemen, firemen, street cleaners, health officers i.e. key
workers) make it possible for private industry to function in an atmosphere of
law, order, freedom and peace. But their justification consists in the utility
of their services. It does not consist in the "purchasing power" they possess
by virtue of being on the public payroll. 

### The Fetish of Full Employment

The economic goal of any nation, as of any individual, is to get the greatest
results with the least effort.

Maximize production, employment merely the means.

We can easily have full employment without full production.

The progress of civilization has meant the reduction of employment, not its
increase. (Abolished child labour)


### The Drive For Exports

Exports and imports must equal each other in the long run.

Deciding to increase our exports, also decide to increase imports &hellip;
foreign exchange

National government loans (upside to loans not being repaid) -> ???

An export subsidy is a clear case of giving a foreigner something for nothing.
It is another case of trying to get rich by giving things away.

Bad loans and export subsidies may have negative first-order effects, but
greater long-run outcomes. (?)

### "Parity" Prices

Example, rise in farmer prices so he can afford industrial equipment. Prices
should rise relative to each other. 

The farmers get more for their crops thus purchase power increases, more
prosperous and buy more for industry products.

However, the increased commodity prices bump up the prices of goods related.
Wheat and bread. The city bread buyer thus loses purchase power, no net
industry gain.

The agricultural increase in business leads to city business decrease.

The farmer reducing production for "parity" produces less, his income does not
increase in proportion to his prices.  

So the alleged benefits of still another scheme evaporate as soon as we trace
not only its immediate effects on a special group but its long-run effects on
everyone.

### Saving the X Industry

Saving industry x as a generalized parity argument/tariff.

In order that new industries may grow fast enough it is necessary for some old
to be allowed to shrink or die for the sake of releasing capital and labour for
new industries (Horse and buggy trade)


### "Stabilizing" Commodities

Government intervention -> keeps high-cost producers in the game, causing
inefficiency in the market. Without intervention, the inefficient producers are
driven out, the efficient ones can expand and produce at a lower cost. Thus
raising more capital for the economy. (?) (Advocating for monopolies?)

### Government Price-Fixing

Argument for price fixing, keeping costs down so everyone can get a fair share
than only the people with purchasing power allowed.

### Minimum Wage Laws

Minimum wage caps the amount of man power by not being able to employ workers
that are worth less than minimum wage. For a low wage you substitute for
unemployment. (hmm...)

The benefit of minimum wage is for workers being paid below market value.

Argument for scrapping minimum wage states that industry X should be priced out
if it can't pay above minimum wage. However, more jobs lost (whole industry)
more than it produces.

The best way to raise wages is to raise labour productivity.

- Increase in capital accumulation (new machines to aid workers)
- New technology
- Efficient management
- Efficient and industrious workers
- Better education and training

The more he produces the more he increases community wealth, the more his
services are worth to consumers and employers hence the more he'll get paid.


### Lessons Restated

Economics is a science recognising _secondary_ consequences and seeing
_general_ consequences.  

There's no change in public taste/morals that would not hurt someone.  

Less policemen, lawyers and judges without criminals (there'll be increase in
another field (?))

Tariffs, destruction of machinery, restriction schemes: the insane doctrine of
wealth through scarcity.

May always be privately true for any particular group of producers in isolation
but a doctrine which is publicly false.

To see the problem as a whole, and not in fragments: that is the goal of
economic science.


**New Terminology** :)

### Dictionary 

Sophism
: A plausible but fallacious argument.

Purchasing power
: the amount of goods and services that can be purchased with a unit of currency

Impetus
: the force with which any body is driven or impelled; Momentum



